clixir/docs/Clixir.md, before:

# Clixir

_Disclaimer: for now, this is design documentation, actual implementation may have differences. See
the code, the test, and the demo app for the truth_

We write the C code in Elixir and use macros to generate both the Elixir bindings
and the C code. This idea was blatantly stolen from Squeak Smalltalk. As we aim
for a very low level interface, all the functions will have the same structure in
C: unmarshall arguments, make call, marshall return values; so "Clixir" can start
out simple.

```elixir

  defgfx glfw_get_cursor_pos(window, pid) do
    cdecl "GLFWwindow *": window
    cdecl erlang_pid: pid
    cdecl double: [mx, my]
    glfwGetCursorPos(window, &mx, &my)
    {pid, {mx, my}}
  end
```

will result in this Elixir code (both a regular and a blocking synchronous version
are generated, although I think the sync version shouldn't be used ;-)):

```elixir
  @spec glfw_get_cursor_pos(integer, pid) :: none
  def glfw_get_cursor_pos(window, pid) do
    GraphicsServer.send_command(GraphicsServer, {:glfw_get_cursor_pos, window, pid})
  end

  @spec glfw_get_cursor_pos_s(integer) :: {float, float}
  def glfw_get_cursor_pos(window) do
    glfw_get_cursor_pos(window, self)
    receive do
      {mx, my} when is_float(mx) and is_float(my) -> {mx, my}
    end
  end
```

and the following C code:

```c
static void _dispatch_glfw_get_cursor_pos(const char *buf, unsigned short len, int *index) {

  GLFWwindow *window;
  erlang_pid pid;
  double mx, my;

  assert(ei_decode_longlong(buf, index, (long long *) &window) == 0);
  assert(ei_decode_pid(buf, index, &pid) == 0);

  glfwGetCursorPos(window, &mx, My);

  ei_encode_version(response, &response_index);
  ei_encode_tuple_header(response, &response_index, 2);
  ei_encode_pid(response, &response_index, &pid);
  ei_encode_tuple_header(response, &response_index, 2);
  ei_encode_double(response, &response_index, mx);
  ei_encode_double(response, &response_index, my);

  write_response_bytes(response, response_index);
}
```

## Usage

Although Clixir was specifically created for [Uderzo](https://hex.pm/packages/uderzo),
it is very easy to use stand-alone. Uderzo's repository has a [Clixir example application](https://github.com/cdegroot/uderzo_poncho/tree/master/clixir_example) that shows a minimal
"hello, world". The following files are relevant:

* [c_src/example.hx](https://github.com/cdegroot/uderzo_poncho/blob/master/clixir_example/c_src/example.hx) is the required Clixir header file. This file should pull in all the includes, define
macros, etcetera - stuff that cannot be (yet) done in Clixir. It is slapped on top of the generated code;

* [lib/example.ex](https://github.com/cdegroot/uderzo_poncho/blob/master/clixir_example/lib/example.ex) is a minimal Elixir module that uses the Clixir `def_c` macro. Please take the warning
about not sending anything to stdout to heart, because it's likely to really mess up things :-).

* Finally, [lib/example_application.ex](https://github.com/cdegroot/uderzo_poncho/blob/master/clixir_example/lib/example_application.ex) is the "application". It invokes the Clixir-generated
method. Note how it looks like any other Elixir invocation - the whole idea is to make
invoking C code as transparent as possible.

## Performance

Performance of the protocol should be very good, for the following reasons:

* the `ei_decode_..` family seems to do very little copying and is efficient by keeping
  a pointer in a buffer that moves up; ideally, this means that a message is scanned in
  a single loop the length of the message;
* dispatching is done using a `gperf` generated hashtable. These perfect hashtables are
  very fast, usually requiring just two memory lookups to find the function pointer to
  dispatch to.
* most of the tight rendering code is (and should be kept) async - you're just sending
  messages over a local file descriptor pipe and keeping the pipe filled when drawing a
  frame should be very easy.

Commit message:

Added some documentation about the Clixir example

clixir/docs/Clixir.md, after:

# Clixir

_Disclaimer: for now, this is design documentation, actual implementation may have differences. See
the code, the test, and the demo app for the truth_

We write the C code in Elixir and use macros to generate both the Elixir bindings
and the C code. This idea was blatantly stolen from Squeak Smalltalk. As we aim
for a very low level interface, all the functions will have the same structure in
C: unmarshall arguments, make call, marshall return values; so "Clixir" can start
out simple.

```elixir

  defgfx glfw_get_cursor_pos(window, pid) do
    cdecl "GLFWwindow *": window
    cdecl erlang_pid: pid
    cdecl double: [mx, my]
    glfwGetCursorPos(window, &mx, &my)
    {pid, {mx, my}}
  end
```

will result in this Elixir code (both a regular and a blocking synchronous version
are generated, although I think the sync version shouldn't be used ;-)):

```elixir
  @spec glfw_get_cursor_pos(integer, pid) :: none
  def glfw_get_cursor_pos(window, pid) do
    GraphicsServer.send_command(GraphicsServer, {:glfw_get_cursor_pos, window, pid})
  end

  @spec glfw_get_cursor_pos_s(integer) :: {float, float}
  def glfw_get_cursor_pos(window) do
    glfw_get_cursor_pos(window, self)
    receive do
      {mx, my} when is_float(mx) and is_float(my) -> {mx, my}
    end
  end
```

and the following C code:

```c
static void _dispatch_glfw_get_cursor_pos(const char *buf, unsigned short len, int *index) {

  GLFWwindow *window;
  erlang_pid pid;
  double mx, my;

  assert(ei_decode_longlong(buf, index, (long long *) &window) == 0);
  assert(ei_decode_pid(buf, index, &pid) == 0);

  glfwGetCursorPos(window, &mx, My);

  ei_encode_version(response, &response_index);
  ei_encode_tuple_header(response, &response_index, 2);
  ei_encode_pid(response, &response_index, &pid);
  ei_encode_tuple_header(response, &response_index, 2);
  ei_encode_double(response, &response_index, mx);
  ei_encode_double(response, &response_index, my);

  write_response_bytes(response, response_index);
}
```

## Usage

Although Clixir was specifically created for [Uderzo](https://hex.pm/packages/uderzo),
it is very easy to use stand-alone. Uderzo's repository has a [Clixir example application](https://github.com/cdegroot/uderzo_poncho/tree/master/clixir_example) that shows a minimal
"hello, world". The following files are relevant:

* [c_src/example.hx](https://github.com/cdegroot/uderzo_poncho/blob/master/clixir_example/c_src/example.hx) is the required Clixir header file. This file should pull in all the includes, define
macros, etcetera - stuff that cannot be (yet) done in Clixir. It is slapped on top of the generated code;

* [lib/example.ex](https://github.com/cdegroot/uderzo_poncho/blob/master/clixir_example/lib/example.ex) is a minimal Elixir module that uses the Clixir `def_c` macro. Please take the warning
about not sending anything to stdout to heart, because it's likely to really mess up things :-).

* Finally, [lib/example_application.ex](https://github.com/cdegroot/uderzo_poncho/blob/master/clixir_example/lib/example_application.ex) is the "application". It invokes the Clixir-generated
method. Note how it looks like any other Elixir invocation - the whole idea is to make
invoking C code as transparent as possible.

To get this all to build, some things need to be setup correctly:

* [mix.exs](https://github.com/cdegroot/uderzo_poncho/blob/master/clixir_example/mix.exs) needs to
incorporate the Clixir compiler and setup the build environment for the `elixir_make` plugin so that
we can find the correct location for the Erlang libraries we use for deserializing Erlang terms.

* [config/config.exs](https://github.com/cdegroot/uderzo_poncho/blob/master/clixir_example/config/config.exs) must
have a `:clixir` configuration that points to the application that provides the `clixir` executable. You might
have multiple dependencies that use Clixir and they each build their own version of this executable, but only
one can be started at run-time. Usually, your top-level application integrates everything and that
application's executable will have a `clixir` executable that incorporates all Clixir code from your
application and your dependencies.

* Finally, [Makefile](https://github.com/cdegroot/uderzo_poncho/blob/master/clixir_example/Makefile) is
basically boilerplate code you can copy-paste; it takes the generated C file in `c_src` (containing all
Clixir functions in all applications and a `gperf` jump table) and compiles it together with the Clixir
run-time library into the executable that will be started.

## Performance

Performance of the protocol should be very good, for the following reasons:

* the `ei_decode_..` family seems to do very little copying and is efficient by keeping
  a pointer in a buffer that moves up; ideally, this means that a message is scanned in
  a single loop the length of the message;
* dispatching is done using a `gperf` generated hashtable. These perfect hashtables are
  very fast, usually requiring just two memory lookups to find the function pointer to
  dispatch to.
* the default messaging flow is fully asynchronous so that waiting for I/O should never be
  a blocker.

One of the Uderzo examples I coded runs 100 "boids" at 100fps, meaning that 10,000 draw commands are
sent every second; the Clixir executable takes negligible CPU.
